tutorial: Deploying Kafka on Kubernetes using Strimzi and Pulumi (#13818)
pulumi/docs: content/tutorials/kubernetes-strimzi-kafka/index.md

---
title_tag: Deploying Kafka on Kubernetes using Strimzi and Pulumi
allow_long_title: true
title: Deploying Kafka on Kubernetes using Strimzi and Pulumi
layout: single
description: |
  Learn how to deploy a Kafka cluster on Kubernetes using Strimzi and Pulumi.
meta_desc: Learn how to deploy a Kafka cluster on Kubernetes using Strimzi and Pulumi.
meta_image: meta.png
weight: 999
summary: |
  In this guide, we will use [Pulumi](https://www.pulumi.com/) to provision the [Strimzi Kafka Operator](https://strimzi.io/) on a Kubernetes cluster. We’ll then create a Kafka cluster using Custom Resources provided by Strimzi.
youll_learn:
- How to use Pulumi to manage your Kubernetes resources
- How to use Strimzi to deploy a Kafka cluster on Kubernetes
estimated_time: 10
collections_weight: 2
prereqs:
- "A [Pulumi Cloud account](https://app.pulumi.com/signup) and [access token](/docs/pulumi-cloud/accounts/#access-tokens)"
- "The [Pulumi CLI](/docs/install/)"
- "A Kubernetes cluster (for example, [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/))"
- "[kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/releases/download/#kubectl)"
- "[helm](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/)"
collections:
- kubernetes
---

> ## What is Strimzi?

Reviewer: I'd suggest we start up with an overview of Kafka and K8; and what that architecture looks like (with a great visual like you have below), and talk about the common use cases of this scenario ahead of talking about Strimzi. Currently it's a tutorial about Strimzi, but instead it should be about using Pulumi to deploy a Kafka Cluster primarily, then I think it would be still great to say there's a new open source project that makes this much easier than it was in the past.

[Strimzi](https://strimzi.io/) is an open-source project that provides a way to run an Apache Kafka cluster on Kubernetes. It provides operators and custom resources to deploy and manage Kafka clusters on Kubernetes.

It is a CNCF project and is widely used in the Kubernetes community to deploy Kafka clusters as it makes it very easy handle the lifecycle of Kafka clusters. Before Strimzi, deploying Kafka on Kubernetes was a complex task with many manual steps. From creating topics to managing brokers, everything was a manual task.

Strimzi provides the following operators for managing a Kafka cluster running within a Kubernetes cluster.

* **Cluster Operator**: Deploys and manages Apache Kafka clusters, Kafka Connect, Kafka MirrorMaker, Kafka Bridge, Kafka Exporter, Cruise Control, and the Entity Operator

* **Entity Operator**: Comprises the Topic Operator and User Operator
 
* **Topic Operator**: Manages Kafka topics
 
* **User Operator**: Manages Kafka users

The Cluster Operator can deploy the Topic Operator and User Operator as part of an Entity Operator configuration at the same time as a Kafka cluster.

![img_1.png](img_1.png)

> ## Deploying the Strimzi Kafka Operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Deploy the Strimzi Kafka Operator
```

> In this tutorial, we will two different ways to deploy a Kafka cluster on Kubernetes using Strimzi. The first way is to use Helm to deploy the Strimzi Kafka Operator and then create a Kafka cluster using the Strimzi Kafka Custom Resource Definition (CRD). 

Reviewer: I'd suggest we simplify this tutorial to make it focused on using Pulumi to deploy Kafka vs a guide to how to use Strimzi. with that I'd drop having two ways, and highlight how to do this w/Pulumi.

The second way is to use Pulumi to deploy the Strimzi Kafka Operator and create a Kafka cluster using the Strimzi Kafka Custom Resource Definition (CRD).

### Deploy using Helm

To deploy Kafka on Kubernetes using Strimzi, we need to install the Strimzi Kafka Operator first.

```bash
helm upgrade -i strimzi-cluster-operator oci://quay.io/strimzi-helm/strimzi-kafka-operator --namespace strimzi --create-namespace --set watchAnyNamespace="true"
```

Now check that the Strimzi Cluster Operator is running:

```bash
kubectl get pods -n strimzi
```

You should see the Strimzi Cluster Operator pod running.

```bash
NAME                                       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
strimzi-cluster-operator-b8f99bbc4-68btq   1/1     Running   0          17m
```

#### Deploy your first Kafka cluster

First we deploy our Kafka `NodePool` with ephemeral storage:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: my-kafka-node-pool
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  replicas: 1
  roles:
  - controller
  - broker
  storage:
    type: ephemeral
```

Then we deploy our `Kafka` Cluster, with `KRaft` enabled:

#### What is KRaft?

> In order to overcome the limitations related to the ZooKeeper usage, the Kafka community came up with the idea of using Kafka itself to store metadata and use an event-driven pattern to make updates across the nodes. The work started with KIP-500 in late 2019 with the introduction of a built-in consensus protocol based on Raft. That was named Kafka Raft (**KRaft**)

Reviewer: Should we explain more about the Zookeeper usage? is there a blog/article to reference?

Reviewer: Also should we link out to more detail on Kraft ?

KRaft is an event-based implementation of the Raft protocol with a quorum controller maintaining an event log and a single-partition topic named __cluster_metadata to store the metadata. Unlike the other topics, this is special because records are written to disk synchronously, which is required by the Raft algorithm for correctness. 

> It works in a leader-follower mode, where the leader writes events into the metadata topic which is then replicated to the follower controllers by using the KRaft replication algorithm. The leader of that single-partition topic is actually the controller node of the Kafka cluster. The metadata changes propagation has the benefit of being event-driven via replication instead of using RPCs. The metadata management is part of Kafka with the usage of a new quorum controller service which uses an event-sources storage model. The KRaft protocol is used to ensure that metadata are fully replicated across the quorum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It works in a leader-follower mode, where the leader writes events into the metadata topic which is then replicated to the follower controllers by using the KRaft replication algorithm. The leader of that single-partition topic is actually the controller node of the Kafka cluster. The propagation of metadata changes benefits from being event-driven through replication instead of relying on RPCs. The metadata management is part of Kafka with the usage of a new quorum controller service which uses an event-sources storage model. The KRaft protocol is used to ensure that metadata are fully replicated across the quorum.
```

          type: topic
          name: "my-topic"
          patternType: literal
        operation: Write
        host: "*"
```

To publish your first message to the Kafka topic, jump to the [bottom of this page](#publish-your-first-message-to-the-kafka-topic).

## Deploy using Pulumi

In this section, we will use Pulumi to deploy the Strimzi Kafka Operator and create a Kafka cluster using Pulumi [CustomResource](/registry/packages/kubernetes/api-docs/apiextensions/customresource/)

### Select your Pulumi supported language

Initialize a new Pulumi project in an empty directory. Choose your favorite [Pulumi supported language](/docs/iac/languages-sdks/).

```bash
mkdir pulumi-strimzi
cd pulumi-strimzi
# Choose your favorite Pulumi supported language
pulumi new kubernetes-<your-programming-language>
```

This will create a new Pulumi project with the necessary files to deploy resources on Kubernetes. As we are using pre-built templates, we don’t need to write the boilerplate code to bootstrap the project.

### Install Strimzi

Similar to the Helm installation, we will install the Strimzi Kafka Operator using the [Pulumi Kubernetes provider](/registry/packages/kubernetes/).

> Replace the content of created Pulumi program with the following code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace the content of the created Pulumi program with the following code:
```

Add this after your Helm chart code:

{{< chooser language "typescript,python,go,csharp" />}}

{{% choosable language typescript %}}

```typescript
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="typescript" from="14" to="72" >}}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{% choosable language python %}}

```python
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="python" from="18" to="78" >}}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{% choosable language go %}}

```go
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="go" from="1" to="12" >}}
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="go" from="27" to="103" >}}
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="go" from="165" to="168" >}}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{% choosable language csharp %}}

```csharp
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="csharp" from="1" to="62" >}}
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="csharp" from="74" to="138" >}}
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="csharp" from="184" to="189" >}}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

Background:

> * We create a dedicated namespace called `kafka` (optional, but often recommended).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We create a dedicated namespace called `kafka` (optional, but recommended).
```

* We define a `Kafka` custom resource that:
* Uses `apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2`.
* Creates a 3-node Kafka broker
* Sets up both plaintext (plain) and TLS listeners (tls).
* Includes the Entity Operator, which manages users and topics.

> ### Creating a Kafka Topic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create a Kafka Topic
```

Strimzi provides a `KafkaTopic` CRD to manage Kafka topics. Here are the code snippets to create a Kafka topic:

{{< chooser language "typescript,python,go,csharp" />}}

{{% choosable language typescript %}}

```typescript
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="typescript" from="73" to="95" >}}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{% choosable language python %}}

```python
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="python" from="79" to="101" >}}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{% choosable language go %}}

```go
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="go" from="1" to="12" >}}
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="go" from="104" to="128" >}}
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="go" from="165" to="168" >}}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{% choosable language csharp %}}

```csharp
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="csharp" from="1" to="62" >}}
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="csharp" from="140" to="155" >}}
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="csharp" from="184" to="189" >}}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

> ### Creating a Kafka User (Optional)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create a Kafka User (Optional)
```
Also; why make this step optional?

Strimzi also provides a `KafkaUser` CRD to manage Kafka users.

{{< chooser language "typescript,python,go,csharp" />}}

{{% choosable language typescript %}}

```typescript
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="typescript" from="96" to="129" >}}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{% choosable language python %}}

```python
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="python" from="102" to="135" >}}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{% choosable language go %}}

```go
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="go" from="1" to="12" >}}
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="go" from="129" to="164" >}}
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="go" from="165" to="168" >}}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{% choosable language csharp %}}

```csharp
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="csharp" from="1" to="62" >}}
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="csharp" from="157" to="183" >}}
{{< example-program-snippet path="strimzi-kafka" language="csharp" from="184" to="189" >}}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

> ### Deploying the whole stack

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Deploy the Kafka Kubernetes Cluster
```
... or something similar

```

You should see the messages you just created.

```bash
If you don't see a command prompt, try pressing enter.

Hello Strimzi!
Hello World!
```

## Housekeeping

Before moving on, tear down the resources that are part of your stack to avoid incurring any charges.

1. Run `pulumi destroy` to tear down all resources. You'll be prompted to make sure you really want to delete these resources. A destroy operation may take some time, since Pulumi waits for the resources to finish shutting down before it considers the destroy operation to be complete.
2. To delete the stack itself, run `pulumi stack rm`. Note that this command deletes all deployment history from the Pulumi Service.

## Next steps

In this tutorial, you learned how to install Helm on Kubernetes using the Kubernetes provider from Pulumi and the `Release` resource.

- Learn more about Pulumi and Kubernetes in the [Kubernetes documentation](/docs/iac/clouds/kubernetes/).
- Learn more about the `Release` resource in the [Pulumi Kubernetes API documentation](/registry/packages/kubernetes/api-docs/helm/v3/release/).

> - Try the out the `Chart` [tutorial](/tutorials/kubernetes-helm-part-two) to learn how to install Helm charts on Kubernetes using the `Chart` resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Try out the `Kubernetes Helm Chart` [tutorial](/tutorials/kubernetes-helm-part-two) to learn how to install Helm charts on Kubernetes using the `Chart` resource.
```
